[Music]
you know each time I board a plane and
get ready for yet another unbearable
seven-hour transatlantic flight the same
thought goes through my mind
why can't planes be faster everything
else is speeding up smartphones the
Internet
the pace of life in general so when are
we gonna get a super-fast passenger jet
that can cross continents in the time it
takes to watch just one in-flight movie
versus several well speed has always
interested engineers and pilots at least
at first they were pretty good at
getting these metal birds to fly faster
and faster as long ago as 1945 a German
test pilot reached the speed of 610
miles per hour
but then something happened and speed
stopped growing
in fact it's slowing down any guesses
why I'll give you a head ever ridden a
bike going downhill
sure normally riding a bike is as easy
as well riding a bike but once the speed
starts going up it gets harder and
harder to control those handlebars huh
with planes the same thing was happening
only you don't have the surface of a
road or sidewalk trying to push the
front wheel this or that way
nope it's all air wait how can air cause
problems with controlling a plane it's
just air well don't forget there's also
this thing called aerodynamics that's a
fancy word for the movement of air
around an object
if you've ever stuck your hand out the
car window then you know how much force
air can have you don't feel anything if
the car isn't going that fast but once
it starts zooming up the highway speeds
that air that hit your hand feels very
solid indeed especially if you lift your
flat palm up a bit to create more
surface area to act on that force can be
so strong that it's hard to lower your
hand back down which serves as a
reminder to keep all your body parts
inside a moving vehicle now I'm going to
assume any car you've ever been
goes on the low end of subsonic speeds
that is lower than the speed of sound or
about 767 miles per hour
speed like light also takes time to get
somewhere it just does it incredibly
fast so that it seems like it's
instantaneous that's why things get
really interesting when we talk about
supersonic planes also known as the ones
that go above the speed of sound yes
there are supersonic aircraft and they
can be especially hard to control
just imagine the aerodynamics of a plane
flying faster than 767 miles per hour
air particles which used to move around
the plane in a kind of a circle now
can't keep up the pace they get squished
together and form a sort of barrier have
you ever heard someone talking about a
plane breaking the sound barrier that's
exactly what I'm talking about when
aircraft managed to smash through that
wall of highly compressed air it forms
an explosive sound called a sonic boom
if you're in the plane at the moment you
won't hear it because you're flying
faster than sound does but if you're
standing on the ground below
oh you'll hear it all right planes
usually reach supersonic speeds far from
city airports so that they don't scare
the Wits out of unsuspecting people
flying at supersonic speeds against all
that pressure from the air in front of
you it's like trying to run through a
crowd you're exerting force on the
people in front of you which is quite
rude please don't run through crowds but
you're also getting pushed back both in
the front and on the sides from pushing
through all those bodies with planes
that force around the aircraft makes it
less controllable not only can the whole
thing start shaking but temperatures in
front of the plane can also heat up to
570 degrees that much heat and pressure
can actually rip a plane apart that's
why a typical subsonic plane can't fly
in super cruise mode for long distances
it'll simply lose control and break into
pieces still there was a case in 1985
when a Boeing 747 survived a fall at
supersonic speed it
a China Airlines flight from Taiwan to
Los Angeles about 350 miles outside of
San Francisco one of the engines
completely fail one minute later the
plane took a nosedive from an altitude
of 41,000 feet now just imagine you're
on a flight when the plane starts going
down headfirst you're now perpendicular
to the ground and falling toward it at
supersonic speeds I sure hope you're
buckled in because the g-forces will
send you up and slamming into the back
of the cabin but get this the pilots
managed to level it off at just 9,500
feet for your information that's the
nick of time when it comes to aviation
the plane landed in San Francisco with
everyone on board alive ooh talk about
quick thinking and incredible piloting
skills but what about planes actually
meant to fly faster than sound first up
they usually look different from the
planes you're used to seeing at the
airport they have sharp edges and
straight lines
unlike the softer contours and subsonic
planes they also have arrow shaped or
triangular wings all these features
allow them to fly faster and deal with
the intense aerodynamics that comes with
it
SuperSonics were invented for and are
still mainly produced in military
aviation but there were two Jets
used for commercial flights to the
french british concorde and the soviet
tupolev tu-144 these bad boys could
reach speeds of about 1500 miles per
hour at a height of 60,000 feet they
flew two times higher than regular
commercial jets fly since the air gets
less dense thinner air at higher
altitudes means less friction to fight
against which equals easier
controllability the fate of the tu-144
was dramatic and short-lived it was only
used for three years from 1975 to 1978
with just the last six months being
commercial but after two crashes they
pulled the plug on this supersonic
project Concorde was in service for much
longer
from 1976 until 2003 for 27 years this
flying beasts could get passengers from
London to New York in a mere three hours
in case you're wondering that trip
usually takes seven trust me
I count each and every hour so why can't
we go back to the good old days
well if money talks then it was
screaming not worth it when it came to
this project it was way too expensive in
both production and operation that made
it inefficient to the point of not being
worth it at least four passenger flights
Concorde burned through 5,600 gallons of
fuel per hour
while a Boeing 747 uses 4,600 in that
same time not a huge difference and
you're flying fewer hours in a Concorde
so it's worth it right if only the
supersonic beast only held 100
passengers a 747 can carry up to five
times more and if you're thinking who
cares I'll pay anything to get across
the ocean faster by today's rates you'd
be shoveling over $10,000 a roundtrip
on top of that when Concorde started
flying across the Atlantic in the 70s
the first class cabins did have bigger
seats than economy but they still
weren't very comfortable so in short
most people are willing to pay much less
for a first-class seat that folds back
into a bed so that they can sleep for
seven hours versus blowing a bunch of
money to save four hours thus by the
early 2000s Concorde was no longer in
demand the program was just too costly
so they shut it down and that's why we
no longer have the option of taking a
supersonic jet to get to our destination
a lot faster and that's probably for the
best
aviation engineers have worked out ideal
shapes of planes and the most efficient
speed the take away faster doesn't
always mean better you see a flight
isn't just about gliding on the air you
also have to consider takeoff and
landing those two situations can be
extremely dangerous at high speeds so
pilots and everyone on
are better off taking it slow taking the
speed down a bit is also more
comfortable for passengers since the
ride is less noisy again a quiet seven
hours that you can just spend sleeping
might be more tolerable than a brain
racking three hours where a quick catnap
is out of the question
another reason is in engines and fuel
economy the faster the plane is flying
the more the engines have to work if the
engines are constantly on full blast
they don't last as long and need to be
replaced or repaired more often not to
mention they burn more fuel which drives
up ticket prices and lowers demand after
all these years of experimentation
aviation engineers have found the ideal
speed of flight 560 miles per hour but
hey perhaps that's just temporary
Engineers keep looking for new
innovative ways to combine supersonic
speed with controllability and safety in
passenger planes one day the best
scientific minds will come up with
something to make planes faster
comfortable and affordable win-win-win
just how I like it how about you would
you rather pay more to save time or does
every dollar count in your book whether
it's about plane tickets or anything
else let me know your philosophy down in
the comments if you learned something
new today then give this video a like
and share with a friend
but don't go blasting away at supersonic
speeds just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out just click on this left or
right video and enjoy stay on the bright
side of life